________________________________________________________________________

This file is part of Logtalk <http://logtalk.org/>  

Logtalk is free software. You can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the FSF GNU General Public License 3  (plus some additional
terms per section 7).        Consult the `LICENSE.txt` file for details.
________________________________________________________________________


This folder contains supporting files for converting and/or indexing XML 
documentation files (which are created when compiling objects, categories, 
or protocols) to PDF files or (X)HTML files using XSL style sheets. The 
documentation files may also be viewed directly on a web browser that 
supports the W3C standards XML, XSLT, CSS, and HTML 4 or XHTML 1.0.

The shell and command-line scripts should be called from the directory 
containing the XML documenting files that you wish to convert. See the 
description of each script below for details. The `.sh` files are bash
shell scripts while the `.js` files are JScript command-line scripts for
Windows (requiring WSH 5.6 or later version). These scripts assumes that
the `LOGTALKHOME` and `LOGTALKUSER` environment variables are defined and
that the chosen XSLT processor is available in the path.

*MAKE SURE THAT THE XSL PROCESSORS YOU INTEND TO USE ARE PROPERLY INSTALLED 
AND WORKING BEFORE RUNNING THESE SCRIPTS!*

Regarding conversion to (X)HTML, the links to the XSL files on the XML 
files and the links to the CSS files in the generated HTML files assume 
that all files reside in the same directory.

The default XSL file to use (`lgtxml.xsl`, described below) is set in the
`lgtdoc` tool. You may choose a different default XSL file by using the
`xslfile` option.

The documenting files can be generated either as standalone XML files or
containing a reference to either the Logtalk DTD file, `logtalk.dtd`, or
to the Logtalk XML Schema file, `logtalk.xsd`. The reference to the XML
specification file can be either a local reference or a URI reference.
By default, all XML documenting files contain a local reference but that
can be changed by using the `xmlsref` option. Choose the option value
that works best with your XSLT tools. To choose between the DTD or XSD
specifications use the `xmlspec` or `xmlsref` options.

As Logtalk uses a single namespace for all objects, categories, and protocols,
you may want to define an alternate, global compilation directory to store all 
the XML documenting files, thus ensuring proper working of links to other 
entities in the generated (X)HTML files. See the sample settings file in your
Logtalk user folder for details.


Brief description of each file in this folder:


- `lgtxml.xsl`  
	XSLT file for viewing XML files directly in a browser. The links 
	in the (internally generated) HTML 4.01 files point to related XML 
	files. UTF-8 encoding is assumed. Edit the file if you use a different 
	encoding.

- `lgthtml.xsl`  
	XSLT file to output HTML 4.01 files from the XML files. The links in 
	the generated HTML files point to related HTML files. It can be used 
	to batch convert XML files to HTML files. UTF-8 encoding is assumed.
	Edit the file if you use a different encoding.

- `lgtxhtml.xsl`  
	XSLT file to output XHTML 1.1 files from the XML files. The links in 
	the generated XHTML files point to related XHTML files. It can be used 
	to batch convert XML files to XHTML files. UTF-8 encoding is assumed. 
	Edit the file if you use a different encoding.

- `lgttxt.xsl`  
	XSLT file to output simple text files from the XML files. UTF-8 encoding 
	is assumed. Edit the file if you use a different encoding.

- `lgtpdf.xsl`, `lgtpdfa4.xsl`, and `lgtpdfus.xsl`  
	XSLT files to generate PDF files from the XML files (formatted either 
	for A4 paper or US Letter paper) using XSL Formatting Objects. Tested 
	with the XSL-FO processors RenderX 4.4 (<http://www.renderx.com/>) and 
	Apache FOP 0.94 (<http://xmlgraphics.apache.org/fop/>).

	The `lgtpdf.xsl` file defines a parameter for the paper format (either 
	A4 or US Letter). The files `lgtpdfa4.xsl` and `lgtpdfus.xsl` import the
	`lgtpdf.xsl` file and set the paper format parameter to the appropriate 
	value.

- `ie50.xsl`  
	XSLT file for viewing XML files in Microsoft Internet Explorer 5.x 
	(using the outdated Microsoft XML Parser; works with both Macintosh 
	and Windows versions). The links in the (internally generated) HTML 
	files point to related XML files. It can be used to browse and view 
	the XML files directly.

- `logtalk.dtd`  
	DTD file describing the structure of the XML files generated by 
	Logtalk.

- `custom.ent`  
	Document type description defining XML entities for personal data 
	that may be used on Logtalk documenting directives.

- `logtalk.rng`  
	RELAX NG file describing the structure of the XML files generated 
	by Logtalk.

- `logtalk.xsd`  
	XML Schema file describing the structure of the XML files generated 
	by Logtalk.

- `logtalk.css`  
	Cascade style sheet file to render the HTML/XHTML output of the XSL 
	files in a web browser.


- `lgt2pdf.sh` and `lgt2pdf.js` 
	Sample scripts to batch convert XML files to PDF files

	Supported XSL-FO processors:  
		* [Apache FOP processor](http://xmlgraphics.apache.org/fop/) (tested with version 0.94)  
		* [Lunasil Xinc processor](http://www.lunasil.com/index.html) (tested with version 2.02)  
		* [RenderX XEP processor](http://www.renderx.com/) (tested with version 3.8.1)  

	The scripts should be called from the directory containing the XML 
	files you wish to convert. Call the scripts with the help option for 
	a description of the available optional parameters (type `cscript 
	lgt2pdf.js help` or `lgt2pdf.sh -h`; depending on your Logtalk 
	installation, you may simply need to type `lgt2pdf` in order to run 
	the script).

- `lgt2html.sh` and `lgt2html.js`  
	Sample scripts to batch convert XML files to HTML files. These 
	scripts also generate an `index.html` file which contains links 
	to all the converted files.

	Supported XSLT processors:  
		* [libxslt](http://xmlsoft.org/XSLT/) (tested with version 1.1.8)  
		* [Xalan](http://xml.apache.org/xalan-c/index.html) (tested with version 1.7.0)  
		* [Sablotron](http://www.gingerall.com/charlie/ga/xml/p_sab.xml) (tested with version 1.0.1)  
		* [Microsoft MSXSL](http://msdn.microsoft.com/XML/XMLDownloads/default.aspx) (only for the Windows JScript script)

	The scripts should be called from the directory containing the XML files 
	you wish to convert. Call the scripts with the help option for a description 
	of the available optional parameters (type `cscript lgt2html.js help` or 
	`lgt2html.sh -h`; depending on your Logtalk installation, you may simply 
	need to type `lgt2html` in order to run the script).


- `lgt2xml.sh` and `lgt2xml.js`  

	Sample scripts for indexing the XML files in the current directory 
	by generating an `index.html` file which contains links to all the 
	files. In addition, these scripts also copies of the `lgtxml.xsl` 
	and `logtalk.css` files to the current directory, allowing direct 
	visualization of the XML files on a supported web browser.

	The scripts should be called from the directory containing the XML files 
	you wish to index. Call the scripts with the help option for a description 
	of the available optional parameters (type `cscript lgt2xml.js help` or 
	`lgt2xml.sh -h`; depending on your Logtalk installation, you may simply 
	need to type `lgt2xml` in order to run the script).

- `lgt2txt.sh` and `lgt2txt.js`  
	Sample scripts to batch convert XML files to text files.

	The scripts should be called from the directory containing the XML files 
	you wish to convert. Call the scripts with the help option for a description 
	of the available optional parameters (type `cscript lgt2txt.js help` or 
	`lgt2txt.sh -h`; depending on your Logtalk installation, you may simply 
	need to type `lgt2txt` in order to run the script).


Note that you can write other XSL files for converting the XML files to 
other formats besides PDF or (X)HTML. You can also write alternative CSS 
and XSL files to change the appearance of the (X)HTML and PDF files.
