.. _library_java:

``java``
========

The library Java entities define a minimal abstraction for calling Java
from Logtalk. This abstraction makes use of Logtalk parametric objects
and allows creating Java object, accessing Java class fields, and
calling Java class and object methods using syntax closer to Logtalk. It
also gives access to some Java utility predicates.

This abstraction was developed primarily to work with the JPL library
bundled with SWI-Prolog and YAP. However, it's expected to be
implementable with alternative Java interfaces found in other backend
Prolog compilers. Currently, a preliminary implementation is also
available for JIProlog.

The main idea in this abstraction layer is to use parametric objects
where the first parameter holds the Java reference (usually to a class
or object) and an optional second parameter holds the return value.
Together with a forward message handler, this allows the use of Java
messages with the same functor and number of arguments as found in the
relevant JavaDocs.

API documentation
-----------------

Open the
`../../docs/library_index.html#java <../../docs/library_index.html#java>`__
link in a web browser.

Loading
-------

To load all entities in this library, load the ``loader.lgt`` file:

::

   | ?- logtalk_load(java(loader)).

Testing
-------

To test this library predicates, load the ``tester.lgt`` file:

::

   | ?- logtalk_load(java(tester)).

Usage
-----

The two main objects in this library are
``java(Reference, ReturnValue)`` and ``java(Reference)``. Use the latter
if you want to ignore the return value or when calling a void Java
method.

The ``java`` object implements utility predicates. For some backend Java
interfaces such as JPL (available in SWI-Prolog and YAP) there is also a
``java_hook`` hook object for removing any overhead when using this
library abstraction.

For usage examples and unit tests, see the ``jpl`` example.

Known issues
------------

When running Java GUI examples on the macOS Terminal application, you
may get a Java error saying that the AWT cannot be started. In
alternative, try to run the example from within the SWI-Prolog macOS
application instead of using the shell integration script. This issue is
due to a macOS Java issue that's orthogonal to both SWI-Prolog/YAP and
Logtalk.
