..
   This file is part of Logtalk <https://logtalk.org/>  
   Copyright 1998-2020 Paulo Moura <pmoura@logtalk.org>

   Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
   you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
   You may obtain a copy of the License at

       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
   limitations under the License.


.. index:: pair: threaded_peek/1-2; Built-in predicate
.. _predicates_threaded_peek_1_2:

``threaded_peek/1-2``
=====================

Description
-----------

::

   threaded_peek(Goal)
   threaded_peek(Goal, Tag)

Checks if the result of proving ``Goal`` in a new thread is already
available. This call succeeds or fails without blocking execution
waiting for a reply to be available.

The argument of this predicate should be a *variant* of the argument of
the corresponding :ref:`threaded_call/1 <predicates_threaded_call_1_2>`
or :ref:`threaded_once/1 <predicates_threaded_once_1_2>` call.
When the predicate argument is subsumed by the ``threaded_call/1`` or
``threaded_once/1`` call argument, the ``threaded_peek/1`` call will
succeed iff its argument unifies with an already available solution of
the (more general) goal.

The ``threaded_peek/2`` variant accepts a threaded call identifier tag
generated by the calls to the :ref:`threaded_call/2 <predicates_threaded_call_1_2>`
and :ref:`threaded_once/2 <predicates_threaded_once_1_2>` predicates. Tags
shall be regarded as an opaque term; users shall not rely on its type.

Modes and number of proofs
--------------------------

::

   threaded_peek(+callable) - zero_or_one
   threaded_peek(+callable, +nonvar) - zero_or_one

Errors
------

| ``Goal`` is a variable:
|     ``instantiation_error``
| ``Goal`` is neither a variable nor a callable term:
|     ``type_error(callable, Goal)``
| ``Tag`` is a variable:
|     ``instantiation_error``

Examples
--------

| To check for an asynchronous goal proof result:
|     ``threaded_peek(Goal)``
| To check for an asynchronous message to *self* result:
|     ``threaded_peek(::Goal)``
| To check for an asynchronous message result:
|     ``threaded_peek(Object::Goal)``

.. seealso::

   :ref:`predicates_threaded_call_1_2`,
   :ref:`predicates_threaded_exit_1_2`,
   :ref:`predicates_threaded_ignore_1`,
   :ref:`predicates_threaded_once_1_2`,
   :ref:`predicates_threaded_cancel_1`,
   :ref:`predicates_threaded_1`
