..
   This file is part of Logtalk <https://logtalk.org/>  
   Copyright 1998-2018 Paulo Moura <pmoura@logtalk.org>

   Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
   you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
   You may obtain a copy of the License at

       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
   limitations under the License.


.. index:: threaded_exit/1-2
.. _predicates_threaded_exit_1_2:

threaded_exit/1-2
=================

Description
-----------

::

   threaded_exit(Goal)
   threaded_exit(Goal, Tag)

Retrieves the result of proving ``Goal`` in a new thread. This predicate
blocks execution until the reply is sent to the
:term:`this` message queue by the thread
executing the goal. When there is no thread proving the goal, the
predicate generates an exception. This predicate is non-deterministic,
providing access to any alternative solutions of its argument.

The argument of this predicate should be a *variant* of the argument of
the corresponding :ref:`predicates_threaded_call_1_2` call.
When the predicate argument is subsumed by the ``threaded_call/1`` call
argument, the ``threaded_exit/1`` call will succeed iff its argument is
a solution of the (more general) goal.

The variant ``threaded_exit/2`` accepts a threaded call identifier tag
generated by the calls to the :ref:`predicates_threaded_call_1_2` and
:ref:`predicates_threaded_once_1_2` predicates. Tags shall
be regarded as an opaque term; users shall not rely on its type.

Modes and number of proofs
--------------------------

::

   threaded_exit(+callable) - zero_or_more
   threaded_exit(+callable, +nonvar) - zero_or_more

Errors
------

| Goal is a variable:
|     ``instantiation_error``
| Goal is neither a variable nor a callable term:
|     ``type_error(callable, Goal)``
| no thread is running for proving Goal:
|     ``existence_error(goal_thread, Goal)``
| Tag is a variable:
|     ``instantiation_error``

Examples
--------

| To retrieve an asynchronous goal proof result:
|     ``threaded_exit(Goal)``
| To retrieve an asynchronous message to *self* result:
|     ``threaded_exit(::Goal)``
| To retrieve an asynchronous message result:
|     ``threaded_exit(Object::Goal)``

.. seealso::

   :ref:`predicates_threaded_call_1_2`,
   :ref:`predicates_threaded_ignore_1`,
   :ref:`predicates_threaded_once_1_2`,
   :ref:`predicates_threaded_peek_1_2`,
   :ref:`predicates_threaded_1`
