{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Tahoma;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\vieww19120\viewh15660\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardeftab720

\f0\b\fs16 \cf0 README\

\b0 \
1. About\
2. Logtalk web site\
3. Registration\
4. Support\
5. Installation\
6. Customization\
7. Running\
8. Documentation\
9. Upgrading\
10. Citations\
11. Contributions\
12. Legal\
\
\

\b 1. ABOUT\

\b0 \
Logtalk is an *object-oriented logic programming language* that extends and\
leverages the Prolog language with a feature set suitable for programming\
in the large. As a multi-paradigm language, it includes support for both\
prototypes and classes, protocols (interfaces), component-based programming\
through category-based composition, event-driven programming, coinduction,\
and high-level multi-threading programming. Logtalk uses standard Prolog\
syntax with the addition of some operators and directives and can be used\
with any Prolog implementation compliant with official and de facto\
standards as the back-end compiler.\
\
\

\b 2. LOGTALK WEB SITE\

\b0 \
The latest release of the Logtalk package is always available at the URL:\
\
	{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://logtalk.org/"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 \ul \ulc2 http://logtalk.org/}}\
\
At this address you can also find additional documentation and information\
about Logtalk.\
\
\

\b 3. REGISTRATION\

\b0 \
To register as a Logtalk user either use the registration form found at \
the Logtalk web site:\
\
	{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://logtalk.org/regform.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 \ul \ulc2 http://logtalk.org/regform.html}}\
\
or send an email message to:\
\
	registration@logtalk.org\
\
with the following information:\
\
email address, first and last name, organization, organization type \
(education, commercial, government, ...), Prolog compilers you use \
(optional), platforms (mac, pc, unix,...) (optional), projects where \
you intend to use Logtalk (optional)\
\
\

\b 4. SUPPORT\

\b0 \
For support options, please consult the page:\
\
	{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://logtalk.org/support.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 \ul \ulc2 http://logtalk.org/support.html}}\
\
\

\b 5. INSTALLATION\

\b0 \
Logtalk can be installed either from sources by running a few shell scripts \
or by using one of the provided installers, depending on your operating \
system. For manual installation, see the file INSTALL.txt for detailed \
instructions.\
\
See the user manual for a description of the source files organization \
and for using instructions (to read the user manual open the file \
manuals/index.html with a web browser). Most files are formatted using\
tabs (the recommended setting is a tab width equivalent to 4 spaces).\
\
\

\b 6. CUSTOMIZATION\

\b0 \
The file CUSTOMIZE.txt provides detailed instructions for customizing the\
Logtalk installation and working environment.\
\
\

\b 7. RUNNING\

\b0 \
The file QUICK_START.txt provides quick instructions for those of you\
in a hurry to run Logtalk, provided that your favorite Prolog compiler\
is supported.\
\
\

\b 8. DOCUMENTATION\

\b0 \
The reference and user manuals and the tutorial are provided in XHTML format \
and can be found in the manuals directory. PDF versions of the reference\
and user manuals can be downloaded from the Logtalk web site.\
\
The file RELEASE_NOTES.txt contains descriptions of all Logtalk updates \
since the first public version. Read it carefully if you have been using a \
previous Logtalk version.\
\
The documentation for the Logtalk library is provided in XHTML format and\
can be found in the library/docs directory.\
\
\

\b 9. UPGRADING\

\b0 \
If you are upgrading from a previous Logtalk version, please check the file \
UPGRADING.txt for instructions on how to upgrade your programs or your \
custom adapter files to run under this new version.\
\
\

\b 10. CITATIONS\

\b0 \
If you find Logtalk useful, please include a citation on your publications.\
Consult the file BIBLIOGRAPHY.bib for bibliographic references in BibTeX \
format (the Logtalk technical report published on 2000 and the 2003 PhD\
thesis on Logtalk are good choices).\
\
\

\b 11. CONTRIBUTIONS\

\b0 \
Contributions, constructive criticism, patches, bug reports, and suggestions\
are always welcome. Major code and documentation contributions require the\
contributor to sign and submit a contributor license agreement and should\
be made available under the Logtalk license without any additional terms or\
conditions. Contributions using other licensing terms may also be distributed\
with Logtalk with the understanding that the terms of their use depends solely\
on the authors chosen licensing terms and may require a separate, independent,\
agreement between users and authors.\
\
\

\b 12. LEGAL\

\b0 \
Logtalk is copyrighted by Paulo Moura and made available under the Apache\
License 2.0. See the LICENSE.txt file for the license terms. The copyright notice \
and license applies to all files in this release unless otherwise explicitly stated. \
See the NOTICE.txt for detailed copyright information.\
\
Some files that are part of the Logtalk distribution are distributed using\
a different license and/or are copyrighted by a Logtalk contributor.\
\
Some of the included examples are adaptations to Logtalk of Prolog examples\
found elsewhere (e.g. in manuals, tutorials, books, and public mailing list\
discussions). The copyright in the examples original code should be assumed\
to belong to the original authors.\
\
Logtalk is a registered trademark of Paulo Moura.\
}