.TH logtalk_doclet 1 "January 15, 2026" "Logtalk 3.98.0" "Logtalk Documentation"

.SH NAME
logtalk_doclet \- Logtalk script for automating running doclets

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B logtalk_doclet -v
.br
.B logtalk_doclet -p \fIprolog\fR
[\fB-d \fIresults\fR]
[\fB-t \fItimeout\fR]
[\fB-s \fIprefix\fR]
[\fB-- \fIarguments\fR]
.br
.B logtalk_doclet -h

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBlogtalk_doclet\fR is a script for automating running Logtalk doclets. This script runs doclets found in a directory and recursively in its sub-directories by scanning for \fIdoclet.lgt\fR and \fIdoclet.logtalk\fR source files. The script assumes that the doclets use an \fIinitialization/1\fR directive to automatically run the documentation generation goal at loading time. A non-zero exit status is returned in case of failed doclets, timed out doclets, or crashed doclets.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-v
Print script version.
.TP
.BI \-p
Backend Prolog compiler. Required. The following identifiers are used: B-Prolog - \fIb\fR, CxProlog - \fIcx\fR, ECLiPSe - \fIeclipse\fR, GNU Prolog - \fIgnu\fR, GNU Prolog (native code) - \fIgnunc\fR, JIProlog - \fIji\fR, XVM - \fIxvm\fR, SICStus Prolog - \fIsicstus\fR, SWI-Prolog - \fIswi\fR, SWI-Prolog with Logtalk pack - \fIswipack\fR, Tau Prolog - \fItau\fR, XSB - \fIxsb\fR, YAP - \fIyap\fR.
.TP
.BI \-d
Directory to store the doclet run logs. Default is the local \fI./logtalk_doclet_logs\fR directory.
.TP
.BI \-t
Timeout in seconds for running each doclet. Default is \fI0\fR (i.e., disabled).
.TP
.BI \-s
Path prefix to suppress when printing doclet paths. Default is the user home directory.
.TP
.BI \--
Arguments to be passed to the integration script used to run the doclets (no default).
.TP
.B \-h
Provide help on script usage.

.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
All doclets succeeded. There are no timed out or crashed doclets.
.TP
.B 1
Some doclets failed. But there are no timed out or crashed doclets.
.TP
.B 3
One or more doclets timed out while executing. But there are no crashed doclets.
.TP
.B 7
One or more doclets crashed the process running them.

.SH IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
When the script detects either a \fItimeout\fR, \fIgtimeout\fR, or \fIgnutimeout\fR command (provided by the GNU \fIcoreutils\fR package), it will use it to run each test set if the timeout option is set to a value greater than zero. This package can be easily installed in POSIX operating-systems (including Linux and macOS) if not provided by default. On Windows operating-systems, the native timeout command is not usable for this purpose. But the Git for Windows installer includes the GNU \fIcoreutils\fR package, which can be used from the bundled Bash shell.
.TP
The script kills all created child processes on exit using the \fIpkill\fR command.
.TP
The \fIgnunc\fR backend requires creating a GNU Prolog executable that includes Logtalk named \fIgplgtnc\fR and making it available in the system \fIPATH\fR. This executable can be created using the embedding script provided in the Logtalk distribution. For example:
\fBgprolog_embed_logtalk.sh -c -d ~/collect -s none -- --new-top-level && mv ~/collect/logtalk ~/collect/gplgtnc\fR

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LOGTALKHOME
Specifies the location of the Logtalk installation.
.TP
.B LOGTALKUSER
Specifies the location of the Logtalk user directory.

.SH FILES
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/library/tester_versions.lgt
Logtalk source file used for printing the Logtalk and backend Prolog compiler versions.
.TP
.BI ./logtalk_doclet_logs
Default directory created with logs resulting from running the doclets. In the case of a broken doclet or a crash while running a doclet, the files in this directory may provided useful information for debugging the problem.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The Logtalk website at https://logtalk.org/
.PP
The Logtalk Handbook at \fB$LOGTALKHOME/docs/handbook/index.html\fR

.SH AUTHOR
Paulo Moura <pmoura@logtalk.org>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1998-2026 Paulo Moura.
