.TH xvmlgt 1 "May 2, 2025" "Logtalk 3.92.0" "Logtalk Documentation"

.SH NAME
xvmlgt \- Logtalk integration script for XVM

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xvmlgt
[\fB-q\fR]
[\fB-g \fIgoal\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBxvmlgt\fR is a Logtalk integration script for XVM. It automatically loads the XVM adapter file, the Logtalk compiler and runtime, the Logtalk default table of library names and paths, and any existing settings file found on the lookup directories. It uses the \fBxvmpl\fR executable \fB-f\fR option to load the Logtalk files. It passes any other options to the \fBxvmpl\fR executable; see the XVM documentation for the available options. By default, this script runs XVM using \fBrlwrap\fR if available.

.SH OPTIONS
The two most common options are:
.TP
.B \-q
Silence Logtalk default startup messages and compilation messages by setting the \fBreport\fR flag to \fBwarnings\fR.
.TP
.B \-g
.I goal
Initialization goal, written between double quotes, to be executed after Logtalk startup.

.SH REQUIREMENTS
XVM 10.0.0 or a later version is required. This integration script looks for a \fBxvmpl\fR executable in the system path.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LOGTALKHOME
Specifies the location of the Logtalk installation.
.TP
.B LOGTALKUSER
Specifies the location of the Logtalk user directory.

.SH FILES
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/integration/logtalk_xvm.pl
Prolog file used for loading the necessary files for starting Logtalk using XVM as the backend compiler.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/adapters/xvm.pl
The XVM adapter file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/core/core.pl
The Logtalk core compiler and runtime file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/paths/paths.pl
The default table of library names and paths.
.TP
.BI ./settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). It may not exist.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). It may not exist.
.TP
.BI $HOME/settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). It may not exist.
.TP
.BI $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/logtalk/settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). It may not exist.
.TP
.BI $HOME/.config/logtalk/settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). It may not exist.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The Logtalk website at https://logtalk.org/
.PP
The Logtalk Handbook at \fB$LOGTALKHOME/docs/handbook/index.html\fR
.PP
logtalk_user_setup(1),\ logtalk_version_select(1),\ logtalk_backend_select(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Paulo Moura <pmoura@logtalk.org>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1998-2026 Paulo Moura.
