.TH ciaolgt 1 "May 24, 2020" "Logtalk 3.39.0" "Logtalk Documentation"

.SH NAME
ciaolgt \- Logtalk integration script for Ciao Prolog

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ciaolgt
[
.B \-e
.I goal
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBciaolgt\fR is a Logtalk integration script for Ciao Prolog. It automatically loads the Ciao Prolog adapter file, the Logtalk compiler and runtime, the Logtalk default table of library names and paths, and any existing settings file found on the startup directory or in the Logtalk user directory.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-e
.I goal
Initialization goal, written between double quotes, to be executed after Logtalk startup.

.SH REQUIREMENTS
Ciao Prolog 1.19.0 is required. This integration script looks for a "ciao" executable in the system path.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LOGTALKHOME
Specifies the location of the Logtalk installation.
.TP
.B LOGTALKUSER
Specifies the location of the Logtalk user directory.

.SH FILES
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/integration/logtalk_ciao.pl
Prolog file used for loading the necessary files for starting Logtalk using Ciao Prolog as the backend compiler.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/adapters/ciao.pl
The Ciao Prolog adapter files.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/core/core.pl
The Logtalk core compiler and runtime file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/paths/paths.pl
The default table of library names and paths.
.TP
.BI ./settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). May not exist.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). May not exist.

.SH CAVEATS
The first run of this script may require using "sudo" depending on the writing permissions of the Logtalk installation directory.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The Logtalk website at https://logtalk.org/
.PP
The Logtalk User and Reference Manuals at \fB$LOGTALKHOME/manuals/index.html\fR
.PP
The Ciao Prolog website at http://ciao-lang.org/
.PP
logtalk_user_setup(1),\ logtalk_version_select(1),\ logtalk_backend_select(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Paulo Moura <pmoura@logtalk.org>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1998-2020 Paulo Moura.
