.TH eclipselgt 1 "January 31, 2014" "Logtalk 3.00.0" "Logtalk Documentation"

.SH NAME
eclipselgt \- Logtalk integration script for ECLiPSe

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B eclipselgt
[
.B \-e
.I goal
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
\f3eclipselgt\f1 is a Logtalk integration script for ECLiPSe. It automatically loads the ECLiPSe adapter file, the Logtalk compiler and runtime, the Logtalk default table of library names and paths, and any existing settings file found on the startup directory or in the Logtalk user directory.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-e \ goal
Initialization goal, written between double quotes, to be executed after Logtalk startup.

.SH REQUIREMENTS
ECLiPSe 6.1#143 are a later version is required.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LOGTALKHOME
Specifies the location of the Logtalk installation.
.TP
.B LOGTALKUSER
Specifies the location of the Logtalk user directory.

.SH FILES
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/integration/logtalk_eclipse.pl
Prolog file used for loading the necessary files for starting Logtalk using ECLiPSe as the back-end compiler.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/adapters/eclipse.pl
The ECLiPSe adapter file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/core/core.pl
The Logtalk core compiler and runtime file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/paths/paths.pl
The default table of library names and paths.
.TP
.BI ./settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). May not exist.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). May not exist.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The Logtalk website at <http://logtalk.org/>
.PP
The Logtalk User and Reference Manuals at \f2$LOGTALKHOME/manuals/index.html\f1
.PP
The ECLiPSe website at <http://www.eclipse-clp.org/>
.PP
logtalk_user_setup(1),\ logtalk_version_select(1),\ logtalk_backend_select(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Paulo Moura <pmoura@logtalk.org>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1998-2014 Paulo Moura.
