.TH lgt2rst 1 "July 17, 2022" "Logtalk 3.57.0" "Logtalk Documentation"

.SH NAME
lgt2rst \- Logtalk script for converting XML documenting files into reStructuredText files, notably for use with Sphinx

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lgt2rst
[\fB-d \fIdirectory\fR]
[\fB-i \fIindex\fR]
[\fB-t \fItitle\fR]
[\fB-p \fIprocessor\fR]
[\fB-s\fI\fR]
[\fB-m\fI\fR]
[\fB-b \fIback-references mapping\fR]
.br
.B lgt2rst
.B \-h

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBlgt2rst\fR is a Logtalk script for converting all Logtalk XML documenting files in the current directory into reStructuredText files, notably for use with Sphinx. Assumes UTF-8 encoding.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-d
.I directory
Output directory for the reStructuredText files.
.TP
.B \-i
.I index
Name of the index file.
.TP
.B \-t
.I title
Title to be used on the index file.
.TP
.B \-p
.I processor
XSLT processor.
.TP
.B \-s
Runs sphinx-quickstart script.
.TP
.B \-m
Runs make html (requires also using the \fB-s\fI\fR option).
.TP
.B \-b
.I mapping
Name of the Intersphinx mapping for linking library APIs back to library descriptions.
.TP
.B \-h
Prints a summary of the script options.

.SH REQUIREMENTS
Requires a compatible XSLT processor. See the script help screen for more information.
.PP
The use of the \fB-s\fI\fR, \fB-m\fI\fR, and \fB-b\fI\fR options require Sphinx, Intersphinx extension, Read the Docs Sphinx theme, and Pygments to be installed.
.PP
The use of the \fB-b\fI\fR option requires that the used \fBconf.py\fI\fR file defines the mapping. The library description files must have a reStructuredText target in the first line with the name of the library prefixed by \fBlibrary_\fI\fR. See the Intersphinx documentation for details.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LOGTALKHOME
Specifies the location of the Logtalk installation.
.TP
.B LOGTALKUSER
Specifies the location of the Logtalk user directory.

.SH FILES
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_entity.dtd
The Logtalk entity DTD file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_index.dtd
The Logtalk index DTD file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/custom.ent
The Logtalk custom entities file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_entity.xsd
The Logtalk entity XML Schema file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_index.xsd
The Logtalk index XML Schema file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_entity_to_rst.xsl
The Logtalk entity XSLT file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_index_to_rst.xsl
The Logtalk index XSLT file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/conf.py_t
The conf.py template file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/css/sphinx/custom.css
The CSS file used to customize the Sphinx Read the Docs theme.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The Sphinx website at https://www.sphinx-doc.org/
.PP
The Pygments website at https://pygments.org/
.PP
The Read the Docs theme website at https://github.com/readthedocs/sphinx_rtd_theme
.PP
The Logtalk website at https://logtalk.org/
.PP
The Logtalk User and Reference Manuals at \fB$LOGTALKHOME/manuals/index.html\fR
.PP
logtalk_user_setup(1),\ lgt2html(1),\ lgt2xml(1),\ lgt2pdf(1),\ lgt2md(1),\ lgt2txt(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Paulo Moura <pmoura@logtalk.org>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1998-2021 Paulo Moura.
