.TH lgt2xml 1 "September 16, 2019" "Logtalk 3.30.0" "Logtalk Documentation"

.SH NAME
lgt2xml \- Logtalk script for generating an index of all XML documenting files in the current directory

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lgt2xml
[
.B \-f
.I format
]
[
.B \-i
.I index
]
[
.B \-t
.I title
]
.br
.B lgt2xml
.B \-h

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBlgt2xml\fR is a Logtalk script for generating an index of all XML documenting files in the current directory, allowing direct visualization of the XML files on a supported web browser.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-f\ format
Format of the index file (either \fIxhtml\fR or \fIhtml\fR).
.TP
.BI \-i\ index
Name of the index file.
.TP
.BI \-t\ title
Title to be used on the index file.
.TP
.B \-h
Prints a summary of the script options.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LOGTALKHOME
Specifies the location of the Logtalk installation.
.TP
.B LOGTALKUSER
Specifies the location of the Logtalk user directory.

.SH FILES
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_entity.dtd
The Logtalk entity DTD file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_index.dtd
The Logtalk index DTD file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/custom.ent
The Logtalk custom entities file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_entity.xsd
The Logtalk entity XML Schema file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_index.xsd
The Logtalk index XML Schema file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk.css
The default CSS file for the generated (X)HTML title file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_entity_to_xml.xsl
The Logtalk entity XSLT file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_index_to_xml.xsl
The Logtalk index XSLT file.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The Logtalk website at https://logtalk.org/
.PP
The Logtalk User and Reference Manuals at \fB$LOGTALKHOME/manuals/index.html\fR
.PP
logtalk_user_setup(1),\ lgt2html(1),\ lgt2txt(1),\ lgt2pdf(1),\ lgt2md(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Paulo Moura <pmoura@logtalk.org>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1998-2019 Paulo Moura.
