.TH lgt2md 1 "September 16, 2019" "Logtalk 3.30.0" "Logtalk Documentation"

.SH NAME
lgt2md \- Logtalk script for converting XML documenting files into Markdown text files

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lgt2md
[\fB-d \fIdirectory\fR]
[\fB-i \fIindex\fR]
[\fB-t \fItitle\fR]
[\fB-p \fIprocessor\fR]
.br
.B lgt2md
.B \-h

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBlgt2md\fR is a Logtalk script for converting all Logtalk XML documenting files in the current directory into Markdown text files. Assumes UTF-8 encoding.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-d
.I directory
Output directory for the Markdown text files.
.TP
.B \-i
.I index
Name of the index file.
.TP
.B \-t
.I title
Title to be used on the index file.
.TP
.B \-p
.I processor
XSLT processor.
.TP
.B \-h
Prints a summary of the script options.

.SH REQUIREMENTS
Requires a compatible XSLT processor. See the script help screen for more information.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LOGTALKHOME
Specifies the location of the Logtalk installation.
.TP
.B LOGTALKUSER
Specifies the location of the Logtalk user directory.

.SH FILES
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_entity.dtd
The Logtalk entity DTD file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_index.dtd
The Logtalk index DTD file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/custom.ent
The Logtalk custom entities file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_entity.xsd
The Logtalk entity XML Schema file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_index.xsd
The Logtalk index XML Schema file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_entity_to_md.xsl
The Logtalk entity XSLT file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_index_to_md.xsl
The Logtalk index XSLT file.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The Logtalk website at https://logtalk.org/
.PP
The Logtalk User and Reference Manuals at \fB$LOGTALKHOME/manuals/index.html\fR
.PP
logtalk_user_setup(1),\ lgt2html(1),\ lgt2xml(1),\ lgt2pdf(1),\ lgt2txt(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Paulo Moura <pmoura@logtalk.org>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1998-2021 Paulo Moura.
