.TH lgt2pdf 1 "September 16, 2019" "Logtalk 3.30.0" "Logtalk Documentation"

.SH NAME
lgt2pdf \- Logtalk script for converting XML documenting files into PDF files

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lgt2pdf
[\fB-f \fIformat\fR]
[\fB-d \fIdirectory\fR]
[\fB-p \fIprocessor\fR]
.br
.B lgt2pdf
.B \-h

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBlgt2pdf\fR is a Logtalk script for converting all XML documenting files in the current directory into PDF files.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-f
.I format
Paper format (either \fIa4\fR or \fIus\fR).
.TP
.B \-d
.I directory
Output directory for the generated PDF files.
.TP
.B \-p
.I processor
XSL-FO processor.
.TP
.B \-h
Prints a summary of the script options.

.SH REQUIREMENTS
Requires a compatible XSL-FO processor. See the script help screen for more information.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LOGTALKHOME
Specifies the location of the Logtalk installation.
.TP
.B LOGTALKUSER
Specifies the location of the Logtalk user directory.

.SH FILES
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_entity.dtd
The Logtalk entity DTD file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_index.dtd
The Logtalk index DTD file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/custom.ent
The Logtalk custom entities file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_entity.xsd
The Logtalk entity XML Schema file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_index.xsd
The Logtalk index XML Schema file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/lgtpdfa4.xsl
The default XSLT file for generating PDF A4 files.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_entity_to_pdf.xsl
The Logtalk entity XSLT file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_index_to_pdf.xsl
The Logtalk index XSLT file.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The Logtalk website at https://logtalk.org/
.PP
The Logtalk User and Reference Manuals at \fB$LOGTALKHOME/manuals/index.html\fR
.PP
logtalk_user_setup(1),\ lgt2html(1),\ lgt2xml(1),\ lgt2md(1),\ lgt2txt(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Paulo Moura <pmoura@logtalk.org>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1998-2021 Paulo Moura.
