.TH lgt2html 1 "September 16, 2019" "Logtalk 3.30.0" "Logtalk Documentation"

.SH NAME
lgt2html \- Logtalk script for converting XML documenting files into (X)HTML files

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lgt2html
[
.B \-f 
.I format
]
[
.B \-d
.I directory
]
[
.B \-i
.I index
]
[
.B \-t
.I title
]
[
.B \-p
.I processor
]
.br
.B lgt2html
.B \-h

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBlgt2html\fR is a Logtalk script for converting all XML documenting files in the current directory into (X)HTML files.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-f 
.I format
Output file format (either \fIxhtml\fR or \fIhtml\fR).
.TP
.B \-d
.I directory
Output directory for the generated (X)HTML files.
.TP
.B \-i
.I index
Name of the index file.
.TP
.B \-t
.I title
Title to be used on the index file.
.TP
.B \-p
.I processor
XSLT processor.

.SH REQUIREMENTS
Requires a compatible XSLT processor. See the script help screen for more information.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LOGTALKHOME
Specifies the location of the Logtalk installation.
.TP
.B LOGTALKUSER
Specifies the location of the Logtalk user directory.

.SH FILES
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_entity.dtd
The Logtalk entity DTD file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_index.dtd
The Logtalk index DTD file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/custom.ent
The Logtalk custom entities file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_entity.xsd
The Logtalk entity XML Schema file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_index.xsd
The Logtalk index XML Schema file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk.css
The default CSS file for the generated (X)HTML files.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_entity_to_html.xsl
The Logtalk entity XSLT file for generating HTML files.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_index_to_html.xsl
The Logtalk index XSLT file for generating HTML files.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_entity_to_xhtml.xsl
The Logtalk entity XSLT file for generating XHTML files.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/tools/lgtdoc/xml/logtalk_index_to_xhtml.xsl
The Logtalk index XSLT file for generating XHTML files.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The Logtalk website at https://logtalk.org/
.PP
The Logtalk User and Reference Manuals at \fB$LOGTALKHOME/manuals/index.html\fR
.PP
logtalk_user_setup(1),\ lgt2txt(1),\ lgt2md(1),\ lgt2xml(1),\ lgt2pdf(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Paulo Moura <pmoura@logtalk.org>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1998-2020 Paulo Moura.
