.TH logtalk_allure_report 1 "September 17, 2021" "Logtalk 3.51.0" "Logtalk Documentation"

.SH NAME
logtalk_allure_report \- Logtalk script for generating Allure reports

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B logtalk_allure_report -v
.br
.B logtalk_allure_report
[\fB-d \fItests\fR]
[\fB-i \fIresults\fR]
[\fB-o \fIreport\fR]
[\fB-t \fItitle\fR]
[\fB-p\fR]
[\fB-- \fIenvironment pairs\fR]
.br
.B logtalk_tester -h

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBlogtalk_allure_report\fR is a script for generating Allure reports. Requires running first the \fIlogtalk_tester\fR script using the \fI-f xunit\fR (or \fI-f xunit_net_v2\fR) command-line option.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-v
Print script version.
.TP
.BI \-d
The directory containing the tests (i.e. the directory where the \fIlogtalk_tester\fR script was run; default is the current directory).
.TP
.BI \-i
Directory where to collect the test results (i.e. the xUnit reports) for generating the report (default is \fI./allure-results\fR).
.TP
.BI \-o
Directory where the report is to be saved (default is \fI./allure-report\fR). If the directory already exists and contains a previous report, its contents are deleted before generating the new report. If the directory exists, is not empty, and does not appear to contain a previous report, the script execution is terminated to prevent data loss.
.TP
.BI \-t
Report title (default is "Allure Report"; this option is ignored when using the \fI-p\fR option).
.TP
.BI \-p
Preprocess results but do not generate report. Useful when the actual generatation of the report is delegated to e.g. a Docker service or a Jenkins plug-in.
.TP
.BI \--
Environment pairs (key1=value1 key2=value2 ...). Used to generate an \fIenvironment.properties\fR for adding additional information to the generated report.
.TP
.B \-h
Provide help on script usage.

.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
Allure report successfully created.
.TP
.B 1
Either the results directory does not exist or the report directory exists but it is not empty and does not contain a previous report.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Run all tests on the current directory and sub-directories using the GNU Prolog backend (saving the test results in the required xUnit format), generate the Allure report, and open the report for browsing:
\fBlogtalk_tester -p gnu -f xunit\fR
.br
\fBlogtalk_allure_report\fR
.br
\fBallure open\fR
.PP
.TP
Set the title for the report and information on the backend used:
\fBlogtalk_allure_report -t "My application tests report" -- Backend='GNU Prolog' Commit=f7a106e\fR

.SH IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
Tested using Allure 2.13.8.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The Allure website at http://allure.qatools.ru
.PP
The Logtalk website at https://logtalk.org/
.PP
The Logtalk User and Reference Manuals at \fB$LOGTALKHOME/manuals/index.html\fR

.SH AUTHOR
Paulo Moura <pmoura@logtalk.org>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1998-2021 Paulo Moura.
