.TH logtalk_doclet 1 "August 16, 2017" "Logtalk 3.11.2" "Logtalk Documentation"

.SH NAME
logtalk_doclet \- Logtalk script for automating running doclets

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B logtalk_doclet -v
.br
.B logtalk_doclet [-p 
.I prolog
.B ] [-d
.I results
.B ] [-t
.I timeout
.B ] [-s
.I prefix
.B ] [--
.I arguments
.B ]
.br
.B logtalk_doclet -h

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBlogtalk_doclet\fR is a script for automating running Logtalk doclets. This script runs doclets found on a directory and recursively in its sub-directories by scanning for \fIdoclet.lgt\fR and \fIdoclet.logtalk\fR source files. The script assumes that the doclets use an \fIinitialization/1\fR directive to automatically run the documentation generation goal at loading time. A non-zero exit status is returned in case of failed doclets, timed out doclets, or crashed doclets.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-v
Print script version.
.TP
.BI \-p
Back-end Prolog compiler. Default is YAP. The following identifiers are used: B-Prolog - \fIb\fR, CxProlog - \fIcx\fR, ECLiPSe - \fIeclipse\fR, GNU Prolog - \fIgnu\fR, JIProlog - \fIji\fR, Lean Prolog - \fIlean\fR, Qu-Prolog - \fIqp\fR, SICStus Prolog - \fIsicstus\fR, SWI-Prolog - \fIswi\fR, SWI-Prolog with Logtalk pack - \fIswipack\fR, XSB - \fIxsb\fR, XSB-MT - \fIxsbmt\fR, YAP - \fIyap\fR.
.TP
.BI \-d
Directory to store the doclet running logs. Default is the local \fI./logtalk_doclet_logs\fR directory.
.TP
.BI \-t
Timeout in seconds for running each doclet. Default is \fI0\fR; i.e. disabled.
.TP
.BI \-s
Path prefix to supress when printing doclet paths. Default is the empty string.
.TP
.BI \--
Arguments to be passed to the integration script used to run the doclets (no default).
.TP
.B \-h
Provide help on script usage.

.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
All doclets succeeded and there are no timed out or crashed doclets.
.TP
.B 1
Some doclets failed but there are no timed out or crashed doclets.
.TP
.B 3
One or more doclets timed out while executing but there are no crashed doclets.
.TP
.B 7
One or more doclets crashed the process running them.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LOGTALKHOME
Specifies the location of the Logtalk installation.
.TP
.B LOGTALKUSER
Specifies the location of the Logtalk user directory.

.SH FILES
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/library/tester_versions.lgt
Logtalk source file used for printing the Logtalk and back-end Prolog compiler versions.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The Logtalk website at <http://logtalk.org/>
.PP
The Logtalk User and Reference Manuals at \fB$LOGTALKHOME/manuals/index.html\fR

.SH AUTHOR
Paulo Moura <pmoura@logtalk.org>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1998-2017 Paulo Moura.
