.TH lvmlgt 1 "November 24, 2021" "Logtalk 3.52.0" "Logtalk Documentation"

.SH NAME
lvmlgt \- Logtalk integration script for LVM

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lvmlgt
[\fB-g \fIgoal\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBlvmlgt\fR is a Logtalk integration script for LVM. It automatically loads the LVM adapter file, the Logtalk compiler and runtime, the Logtalk default table of library names and paths, and any existing settings file found on the lookup directories. It uses the \fBlvm\fR executable \fB-f\fR option to load the Logtalk files. It passes any options to the \fBlvm\fR executable; see the LVM documention for the available options. By default, this script runs LVM using \fBrlwrap\fR if available.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-g
.I goal
Initialization goal, written between double quotes, to be executed after Logtalk startup.

.SH REQUIREMENTS
LVM 2.0.0 or a later version is required. This integration script looks for a "lvmpl" executable in the system path.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LOGTALKHOME
Specifies the location of the Logtalk installation.
.TP
.B LOGTALKUSER
Specifies the location of the Logtalk user directory.

.SH FILES
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/integration/logtalk_lvm.pl
Prolog file used for loading the necessary files for starting Logtalk using LVM as the backend compiler.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/adapters/lvm.pl
The LVM adapter file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/core/core.pl
The Logtalk core compiler and runtime file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/paths/paths.pl
The default table of library names and paths.
.TP
.BI ./settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). May not exist.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). May not exist.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The Logtalk website at https://logtalk.org/
.PP
The Logtalk User and Reference Manuals at \fB$LOGTALKHOME/manuals/index.html\fR
.PP
logtalk_user_setup(1),\ logtalk_version_select(1),\ logtalk_backend_select(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Paulo Moura <pmoura@logtalk.org>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1998-2021 Paulo Moura.
