.TH taulgt 1 "May 26, 2020" "Logtalk 3.39.0" "Logtalk Documentation"

.SH NAME
taulgt \- Logtalk integration script for Tau Prolog

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B taulgt

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBtaulgt\fR is a Logtalk integration script for Tau Prolog running on \fBnode\fR. It automatically loads the Tau Prolog adapter file, the Logtalk compiler and runtime, the Logtalk default table of library names and paths, and any existing settings file found on the startup directory or in the Logtalk user directory.

.SH REQUIREMENTS
Tau Prolog 0.3.0 or a later version is required.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LOGTALKHOME
Specifies the location of the Logtalk installation.
.TP
.B LOGTALKUSER
Specifies the location of the Logtalk user directory.
.TP
.B NODE_PATH
Specifies the \fBnode_modules\fR directory path where Tau Prolog and its dependencies are installed.

.SH FILES
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/integration/logtalk_tau.js
JavaScript file used to emulate a traditional top-level interpreter for Tau Prolog.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/adapters/tau.pl
The Tau Prolog adapter file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/core/core.pl
The Logtalk core compiler and runtime file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/paths/paths.pl
The default table of library names and paths.
.TP
.BI ./settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). May not exist.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). May not exist.

.SH CAVEATS
The first run of this script may require using "sudo" depending on the writing permissions of the Logtalk installation directory.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The Logtalk website at https://logtalk.org/
.PP
The Logtalk User and Reference Manuals at \fB$LOGTALKHOME/manuals/index.html\fR
.PP
The Tau Prolog website at http://tau-prolog.org
.PP
The Node.js website at https://nodejs.org/en/
.PP
logtalk_user_setup(1),\ logtalk_version_select(1),\ logtalk_backend_select(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Paulo Moura <pmoura@logtalk.org>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1998-2020 Paulo Moura.
