.TH tplgt 1 "December 13, 2021" "Logtalk 3.53.0" "Logtalk Documentation"

.SH NAME
tplgt \- Logtalk integration script for Trealla Prolog

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tplgt
[\fB-g \fIgoal\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBtplgt\fR is a Logtalk integration script for Trealla Prolog. It automatically loads the Trealla Prolog adapter file, the Logtalk compiler and runtime, the Logtalk default table of library names and paths, and any existing settings file found on the lookup directories. It uses the \fBtpl\fR executable \fB-l\fR option to load the Logtalk files. It passes any options to the \fBtpl\fR executable; see the Trealla Prolog documention for the available options.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-g
.I goal
Initialization goal, written between double quotes, to be executed after Logtalk startup.

.SH REQUIREMENTS
Trealla Prolog 1.17.0 or a later version is required. This integration script looks for a "tpl" executable in the system path.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LOGTALKHOME
Specifies the location of the Logtalk installation.
.TP
.B LOGTALKUSER
Specifies the location of the Logtalk user directory.

.SH FILES
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/integration/logtalk_tp.pl
Prolog file used for loading the necessary files for starting Logtalk using Trealla Prolog as the backend compiler.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/adapters/trealla.pl
The Trealla Prolog adapter file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/core/core.pl
The Logtalk core compiler and runtime file.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKHOME/paths/paths.pl
The default table of library names and paths.
.TP
.BI ./settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). May not exist.
.TP
.BI $LOGTALKUSER/settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). May not exist.
.TP
.BI $HOME/settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). May not exist.
.TP
.BI $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/logtalk/settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). May not exist.
.TP
.BI $HOME/.config/logtalk/settings.lgt
Logtalk settings file (for overriding default settings in the adapter files). May not exist.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The Logtalk website at https://logtalk.org/
.PP
The Logtalk User and Reference Manuals at \fB$LOGTALKHOME/manuals/index.html\fR
.PP
The Trealla Prolog git repo at https://github.com/infradig/trealla
.PP
logtalk_user_setup(1),\ logtalk_version_select(1),\ logtalk_backend_select(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Paulo Moura <pmoura@logtalk.org>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1998-2021 Paulo Moura.
