.. _library_help:

``help``
========

This tool provides help for Logtalk features and libraries when running
in most operating-systems. For help on the Logtalk compiler error and
warning messages, see the ``tutor`` tool.

Requirements
------------

On Windows, the ``start`` command must be available. On Linux, the
``xdg-open`` command must be available. On macOS, the command ``open``
is used.

Browsing the Handbook and APIs documentation at the top-level requires a
POSIX system and one of the following terminal-based browsers installed:

- https://invisible-island.net/lynx/
- https://w3m.sourceforge.net/
- http://links.twibright.com/
- https://sr.ht/~bptato/chawan/

On macOS, these browsers can be installed with either MacPorts:

::

   $ sudo port install lynx
   $ sudo port install w3m
   $ sudo port install links

Or using Homebrew:

::

   $ brew install lynx
   $ brew install w3m
   $ brew install links
   $ brew install chawan

On Linux systems, use the distribution's own package manager to install
the browsers. For example, in Ubuntu systems:

::

   $ sudo apt install lynx
   $ sudo apt install w3m

If you're running Logtalk from a git clone of its repo, you will need to
run the ``docs/apis/sources/build.sh`` or
``docs/apis/sources/build.ps1`` scripts to generate APIs documentation
HTML files and also run the ``docs/handbook/sources/build.sh`` or
``docs/handbook/sources/build.ps1`` scripts to generate the Handbook
HTML files. Alternatively, you can download the documentation for the
latest stable release from the Logtalk website and save them to the
``docs`` directories.

Customization
-------------

The preferred browser can be set in a ``settings.lgt`` file by defining
the ``help_default_browser`` user-defined flag as follows:

::

   :- initialization(
       create_logtalk_flag(help_default_browser, Browser, [type(atom), keep(true)])
   ).

The valid values for ``Browser`` are: ``lynx`` (default value), ``w3m``,
``links``, ``cha``, and ``default`` (``default`` means use the
operating-system default browser instead of one of the terminal-based
browsers).

We can also select between browsing the HTML files generated by Sphinx
for web browsing or the XHTML files generated by Sphinx for the ePub
version of the documentation by defining the ``help_default_files``
user-defined flag as follows:

::

   :- initialization(
       create_logtalk_flag(help_default_files, Format, [type(atom), keep(true)])
   ).

The valid values for ``Format`` are ``html`` (default value) or
``xhtml``.

The ``samples/settings-sample.lgt`` file contains commented out code for
defining these flags.

On POSIX systems, one of the supported terminal-based browsers must be
installed unless you prefer using the default browser. By default, the
tool checks first for ``lynx``, second for ``w3m``, third for ``links``,
and finally for ``chawan``. When none of these terminal-based browsers
is available in their default installation paths, the documentation is
open in the operating-system default browser.

On Windows systems, the documentation is open in the operating-system
default browser.

When using the terminal-based browsers, after finishing consulting the
documentation and quitting the process, you will be back to the
top-level prompt (if you find that the top-level have scrolled from its
last position, try to set your terminal terminfo to
``xterm-256colour``).

API documentation
-----------------

This tool API documentation is available at:

`../../apis/library_index.html#help <../../apis/library_index.html#help>`__

Loading
-------

::

   | ?- logtalk_load(help(loader)).

Testing
-------

To test this tool, load the ``tester.lgt`` file:

::

   | ?- logtalk_load(help(tester)).

Supported operating-systems
---------------------------

Currently, support is limited to Linux, macOS, and Windows.

This tool relies on the library portable operating-system access
abstraction.

Usage
-----

After loading the tool, use the query ``help::help`` to get started:

::

   | ?- logtalk_load(help(loader)).
   ...

   | ?- help::help.
   ...

When using ECLiPSe, you will need to write the object name, ``help``,
between parentheses to avoid a clash with the "help" built-in operator:

::

   | ?- (help)::help.
   ...

Same sample help queries:

::

   % get et on-line help for the `logtalk_load/2` built-in predicate:

   | ?- help::logtalk_load/2.
   ...

   % get on-line help for the `eos//0` built-in non-terminal:

   | ?- help::eos//0.
   ...

   % consult the Handbook:

   | ?- help::handbook.
   ...

   % consult the APIs documentation:

   | ?- help::apis.
   ...

   % consult the APIs documentation about a library predicate:

   | ?- help::apis(member/2).
   ...

   % consult the APIs documentation about a library non-terminal:

   | ?- help::apis(one_or_more//0).
   ...

   % consult the documentation of a library:

   | ?- help::library(random).
   ...

   % consult the documentation of an entity:

   | ?- help::entity(logtalk).
   ...

   % consult the developer tools documentation:

   | ?- help::tools.
   ...

   % consult the documentation of the lgtunit tool:

   | ?- help::tool(lgtunit).
   ...

Known issues
------------

When using the ``lynx`` terminal-based browser, the
``help_default_files`` flag setting is ignored as this browser doesn't
support XHTML.

When using the terminal-based browsers, the Handbook and APIs search
boxes are not usable as they require JavaScript support. Use instead the
indexes.

Some CSS support is only provided by the Chawan terminal-based browser.
This results in formatting issues when browsing the Logtalk
documentation. Some of these issues can be avoided by setting the
``help_default_files`` flag to ``xhtml``.

The open commands used to open documentation URLs in the default browser
drop the fragment part, thus preventing navigation to the specified
position on the documentation page.

ECLiPSe defines a ``help`` prefix operator that forces wrapping this
atom between parentheses when sending messages to the tool. E.g. use
``(help)::help`` instead of ``help::help``.
